Basic SQL Syntax

----------------------------------------------Data Definition Language (DDL)----------------------------------------------------------
Data Definition Language (DDL) is a subset of SQL used to define and manage the structure of database objects.
DDL commands include CREATE, ALTER, DROP, and TRUNCATE, which are used to create, modify, delete, and empty database structures such as tables, indexes, views, and schemas. 
These commands allow database administrators and developers to define the database schema, set up relationships between tables, and manage the overall structure of the database.
DDL statements typically result in immediate changes to the database structure and can affect existing data.

The main DDL commands are create, alter, drop and truncate.

Create Statement
It is used to create a database or table. While creating the table,we specify table_name,column_name followed by data_types(int,float,varchar,etc) 
and constraints(primary key,not null,etc)

CREATE TABLE table_name
(
   column1 datatype,
   column2 datatype,
   ..... 
)

CREATE TABLE students
(
   id INT PRIMARY KEY,
   Name VARCHAR(20),
   Age INT,
   dob DATE
);

Alter Command
It is used to make a change in the structure of a database. Different operations like adding new columns, 
removing columns, changing data types or adding/removing constraints can be performed.

ALTER TABLE table_name ADD column_name datatype;
ALTER TABLE students#table on which operation is done
ADD roll_no int;#adding column(roll_no) to table

Truncate Command
It is used to delete the entities inside the table while holding the structure of the table.
It free up the space from the table whereas the column names are left resulting to store new data in the table.

TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;
TRUNCATE TABLE students;#students table is truncated

Drop Command
It is used to completely delete a table from the database. the table along with the structure is deleted and can't be found again in the database.

DROP TABLE table_name;